Hello!

My name is Nikolas Wise and I've been developing web projects for nearly 10 years — Git and Github have been a central part of my experience and growth as a developer and I am very enthusiastic about joining your team as a Learning Engineer. The opportunity to join the team responsible for helping developers with their professional and personal growth is incredibly exciting to me!

Throughout my career, I've focused on making excellent and experimental projects that push boundaries and explore new ideas and processes. I started out as a designer, but quickly found that the things I wanted to make were websites and digital products. The idea that creative decisions, understanding, and doing are all connected has always been present in my artistic practice, and this ethos led me to web development. As my understanding of development grows — both through my own independent learning and an incredible array of peers and mentors — so does my desire to push the boundaries of what I can accomplish.

This process has led me through the entire range of what's possible on the internet — grounded in Node and Javascript. I have always kept my ethic of rigorous critique cultivated by the arts and an awareness of effective, excellent design that drives my desire to create.

I've had the opportunity to host lectures, workshops, and teach the fundamentals of web design and development at a post-graduate level, and teaching has always been a major part of my career trajectory. In my current role as Director of Web Development & Technology I am actively engaged in the educational growth and professional development of both the developers on my team and the designers that we work with.

Previously, as a product designer & developer at Esri's Portland Research & Development office, one of my primary responsibilities was understanding the entire ecosystem of mapping and GIS API's — including Esri's own. In this role I worked to improve and expand Esri's developer experience by understanding contemporary best practices in application design. My team was responsible for the creation, development, and growth of the ArcGIS for Developers aspect of Esri's platform. We worked to educate and provide resources for both existing users and make the platform enticing for the next wave of companies and engineers. This project was successful enough that we were asked to bring the same approach to Esri's flagship web product, ArcGIS Online.

Since moving to the Design Studio side of the internet two years ago — both running my own practice and leading the development team at Fuzzco — my primary goal is to work within the constraints of the client/studio system to create the highest quality, most efficient solutions possible. Focusing on business and design goals, maximizing resources, and finding procedural efficiencies have been my primary objectives. My work has been fast-moving and broad in its scope. From marketing sites, to product, to full stack e-commerce solutions, I've been responsible for researching, proposing, and developing integrations, work flows, and third party systems to meet precise, highly sensitive business use cases.

I am very excited to bring my perspective, experience, and dedication to teaching & learning to the Learning Lab team at Github. I look forward to discussing this opportunity further, and am enthusiastic about what ahead for labs.github.com!

Thank you,
Nikolas