---
title: Dysfunctions with Dysfunctions
slug: fun-with-json-ld
description: Someone sent me a copy of _The Five Dysfunctions of a Team_. I didn't really like reading it.
date: 2020.10.22
---

_The Five Dysfunctions of a Team_ by Lencioni reads like middle-manager fan fiction. Beyond the outrageously bad dialogue and cutely arranged set pieces, all spread out across large type, short chapters, and generous white space to pad this brief seminar into a “real book”, Lencioni’s thesis throughout is freighted with the zeitgeist of the early 2000s late capitalist striving. 

Structuring this self-help seminar for middle managers disillusioned with their directionless grind to nowhere as a "fable" (or "bad fiction") makes it read like a shockingly earnest first draft of Max Barry's _Company_, which is a satirical skewering of corporate management consultants and practices. 

Team dysfunctions are seen as failings of individual actions, and that the behavior of individuals in a team is the root cause for failure of the team. This implies that behaving differently in an organization is enough to the change the outcomes of that organization. This is flatly untrue - individuals have little to no ability to change the outcomes of structural and organizational decisions that have been built into the fabric of the group. Lencioni’s fictional startup is built on capitalist axioms that inherently undermine the very points he’s trying to argue. For instance, the root dysfunction he identifies is "Lack of Trust". There is literally no reason, cause, or benefit to “trusting” a corporate team. When employment is at will and there are no protections for workers, focusing on individual impact and the appearance of productivity to peers and higher ups becomes the sole function of work. Placing the goals and priorities of an organization above your own is deeply foolish when that same organization has no doubts or qualms about your place in it. The organization of structural power defines the absence or presence trust, and individual behavior has no sway on that power structure. 

The approach that Lencioni takes in demonstrating (crudely) his ideal team also suffers from one of the key rhetorical traps outlined in _keywords: the new language of capitalism_ by Leary - speaking of the corporate as if it where literally corporal. The Team in this case becomes embodied, and I’m doing so it erases the humanity of its members. This is the key contradiction in the dysfunctions - Lencioni identifies that the only way to sublimate ones individuality away for the sake of the corporate structure is through individual improvement which he equates to moral improvement. This is perhaps less a flaw in his reasoning than a description of corporate America’s ideal employee. The corporation desires all of the reward and benefit of your labor, and the complete devotion of yourself to producing that labor, while disavowing any risks or consequences that may attend it as your own personal problem. Lencioni deserves credit at least for outlining the goals and structures of vampire capitalism so clearly.